docs: haw-cross-linking (#3312)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/how-arbitrum-works/bold/gentle-introduction.mdx

Let’s dive into an overview of how BoLD actually works.

> 1. **An assertion is made:** Validators begin by taking the most recent confirmed [assertion](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/assertions.mdx), called `Block A`, and assert that some number of transactions afterward, using Nitro’s deterministic [State Transition Function (STF)](/how-arbitrum-works/reference/stf-inputs.mdx), will result in an end state, `Block Z`. If a validator claims that the end state represented by `Block Z` is correct, they will bond their funds to `Block Z` and propose that state to its parent chain. (For more details on how bonding works, see [Bold technical deep dive](/how-arbitrum-works/bold/bold-technical-deep-dive.mdx)). If no one disagrees after a certain period, known as the challenge period, then the state represented by the assertion `Block Z` is confirmed as the correct state of an Arbitrum chain. However, if someone disagrees with the end state `Block Z`, they can submit a challenge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **An assertion is made:** Validators begin by taking the most recent confirmed [assertion](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/assertions.mdx), called `Block A`, and assert that some number of transactions afterward, using Nitro's deterministic [State Transition Function (STF)](/how-arbitrum-works/reference/stf-inputs.mdx), will result in an end state, `Block Z`. If a validator claims that the end state represented by `Block Z` is correct, they will bond their funds to `Block Z` and propose that state to its parent chain. (For more details on how bonding works, see [BoLD technical deep dive](/how-arbitrum-works/bold/bold-technical-deep-dive.mdx)). If no one disagrees after a certain period, known as the challenge period, then the state represented by the assertion `Block Z` is confirmed as the correct state of an Arbitrum chain. However, if someone disagrees with the end state `Block Z`, they can submit a challenge.
```

To recap, both Arbitrum’s current dispute protocol and BoLD require assertions to be posted to the parent chain and employ interactive proving, which involves a back-and-forth between two entities until a single step of disagreement is reached. That single disputed step then gets submitted to contracts on the parent chain, which will eventually declare a winner. For L2s such as Arbitrum One, BoLD must be deployed on a credibly neutral, censorship-resistant backend to ensure fair dispute resolution. Ethereum is therefore the ideal candidate for deploying the BoLD protocol on L2s.

> But you might now be wondering: what about L3 Arbitrum chains that don’t settle to Ethereum? Unlike L2s that settle to Ethereum, assertions on an L3’s state need to be posted to an L2 either via (A) the L3 <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer">Sequencer</a> or (B) the <a data-quicklook-from="delayed-inbox">Delayed Inbox</a> queue managed by the L2 sequencer on L2. If the parent chain (in this case, L2) is getting repeatedly censored or if the L2 sequencer is offline, every block-level assertion and/or sub-challenge assertion would need to wait 24 hours before they can bypass the sequencer (using the the`SequencerInbox`’s [`forceInclusion` method](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/transaction-lifecycle.mdx#force-inclusion-after-delays)). If this were to happen, challenge resolution would get delayed by a time _t_ where _t_ = (24 hours) \* number of moves for a challenge. To illustrate with sample numbers, if a challenge takes 50 sequential moves to resolve, then the delay would be 50 days!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But you might now be wondering: what about L3 Arbitrum chains that don't settle to Ethereum? Unlike L2s that settle to Ethereum, assertions on an L3's state need to be posted to an L2 either via (A) the L3 <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer">Sequencer</a> or (B) the <a data-quicklook-from="delayed-inbox">Delayed Inbox</a> queue managed by the L2 sequencer on L2. If the parent chain (in this case, L2) is getting repeatedly censored or if the L2 sequencer is offline, every block-level assertion and/or sub-challenge assertion would need to wait 24 hours before they can bypass the sequencer (using the `SequencerInbox`'s [`forceInclusion` method](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/transaction-lifecycle.mdx#force-inclusion-after-delays)). If this were to happen, challenge resolution would get delayed by a time _t_ where _t_ = (24 hours) \* number of moves for a challenge. To illustrate with sample numbers, if a challenge takes 50 sequential moves to resolve, then the delay would be 50 days!
```

#### Q: For Arbitrum One, does implementing BoLD reduce the scope or remove the need for the Arbitrum Security Council?

BoLD can limit the scope of Arbitrum One and Nova’s reliance on the Security Council as it takes Arbitrum chains one step closer to complete decentralization.

## Related reading

- [BoLD: a technical deep dive](/how-arbitrum-works/bold/bold-technical-deep-dive.mdx): Implementation details of the dispute protocol, including assertions, edges, sub-challenges, and the one-step proof.
- [How BoLD bisection works](/how-arbitrum-works/bold/how-bold-bisection-works.mdx): Interactive visualization that replays real onchain bisections across the block, bigstep, and smallstep levels.

> - [Economics of disputes](/how-arbitrum-works/bold/bold-economics-of-disputes.mdx): Bonding sizes, the resource ratio, and spam prevention in BoLD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Economics of disputes](/how-arbitrum-works/bold/bold-economics-of-disputes.mdx): Bond sizes, the resource ratio, and spam prevention in BoLD.
```
